% Template for Cogsci submission with R Markdown

% Stuff changed from original Markdown PLOS Template
\documentclass[10pt, letterpaper]{article}

\usepackage{cogsci}
\usepackage{pslatex}
\usepackage{float}
\usepackage{caption}

% amsmath package, useful for mathematical formulas
\usepackage{amsmath}

% amssymb package, useful for mathematical symbols
\usepackage{amssymb}

% hyperref package, useful for hyperlinks
\usepackage{hyperref}

% graphicx package, useful for including eps and pdf graphics
% include graphics with the command \includegraphics
\usepackage{graphicx}

% Sweave(-like)
\usepackage{fancyvrb}
\DefineVerbatimEnvironment{Sinput}{Verbatim}{fontshape=sl}
\DefineVerbatimEnvironment{Soutput}{Verbatim}{}
\DefineVerbatimEnvironment{Scode}{Verbatim}{fontshape=sl}
\newenvironment{Schunk}{}{}
\DefineVerbatimEnvironment{Code}{Verbatim}{}
\DefineVerbatimEnvironment{CodeInput}{Verbatim}{fontshape=sl}
\DefineVerbatimEnvironment{CodeOutput}{Verbatim}{}
\newenvironment{CodeChunk}{}{}

% cite package, to clean up citations in the main text. Do not remove.
\usepackage{apacite}

% KM added 1/4/18 to allow control of blind submission
\cogscifinalcopy

\usepackage{color}

% Use doublespacing - comment out for single spacing
%\usepackage{setspace}
%\doublespacing


% % Text layout
% \topmargin 0.0cm
% \oddsidemargin 0.5cm
% \evensidemargin 0.5cm
% \textwidth 16cm
% \textheight 21cm

\title{No evidence for familiarity preferences after partial exposure to
visual concepts in preschoolers and infants}


\author{Gal Raz$^1$ (galraz@mit.edu), \bf{Anjie Cao$^2$  (anjiecao@stanford.edu)},\\ \bf{Minh Khong Bui$^3$  (mbui100@csu.fullerton.edu)}, \\ \bf{Michael C. Frank$^2$ (mcfrank@stanford.edu)},
 and \bf{Rebecca Saxe$^1$ (saxe@mit.edu)} \\
$^1$Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT, $^2$Department of Psychology, Stanford University, \\ $^3$Department of Communicative Sciences and Disorders, California State University, Fullerton \\ }

\newlength{\cslhangindent}
\setlength{\cslhangindent}{1.5em}
\newenvironment{CSLReferences}%
  {}%
  {\par}

\begin{document}

\maketitle

\begin{abstract}
From birth, humans make decisions about what to look at and for how
long. A classic framework proposes encoding as a key driver of looking
behavior in development - in early stages of encoding, infants and young
children prefer to engage with familiar stimuli, while at later stages
of encoding they prefer novel stimuli. Though this framework is often
invoked when interpreting looking time studies, it is rarely validated
empirically. Here, we test these predictions by explicitly manipulating
exposure durations within-subjects. While we found robust evidence for
habituation and novelty preferences, limiting exposure to visual
concepts did not result in familiarity preferences in any age group. Our
findings suggest that limited exposure does not generically lead to
familiarity preferences, and that interpretations of observed
familiarity preferences should be made with care. We argue for the
development of formal frameworks which link the learning problem faced
by participants to their attentional preferences.

\textbf{Keywords:}
psychology; cognitive development; learning
\end{abstract}

\hypertarget{introduction}{%
\section{Introduction}\label{introduction}}

Throughout development, humans are inundated with visual information.
Infants and young children constantly decide how much time to spend
looking at what is in front of them and when to move on to something
else (Dweck, 2017; Haith, 1980; Raz \& Saxe, 2020). Developmental
psychologists have long relied on infants' ability to decide what to
look at and for how long, making inferences about infants' mental
representations (Aslin, 2007; Baillargeon, Spelke, \& Wasserman, 1985;
Fantz, 1963). In a typical study measuring looking time, infants are
presented with the same stimulus repeatedly until their looking time
decreases (habituation). Then, they are presented with a new stimulus,
and the change in their looking time is used as evidence for cognitive
capacities. Despite extensive use of looking time as a measure, the
factors underlying infants' decision to keep looking or look away are
not well understood. In this paper, we conduct a direct empirical test
of the relationships between prior exposure and looking preferences.

One dominant framework for infant looking is that the dynamics of
looking time are governed by the dynamics of learning (Hunter \& Ames,
1988). This framework has been used to derive qualitative predictions
about looking time as a function of prior exposure and stimulus
complexity. If infants have sufficient prior exposure to complete
encoding of one stimulus, they should look longer at a novel stimulus
that offers new opportunities to learn, showing a novelty preference. In
contrast, when infants have only limited prior exposure or have
partially encoded one stimulus, they might look at that same stimulus
for longer to learn more about it, showing a familiarity preference.

However, empirical studies that systematically quantify familiarity
preferences for visual stimuli tend to be older, have smaller sample
sizes, and limited or no data available, making them unsuitable for
evaluating the robustness of the phenomenon (e.g., Hunter, Ames, \&
Koopman, 1983; Rose, Gottfried, Melloy-Carminar, \& Bridger, 1982).
Furthermore, this theoretical framework does not include formal criteria
to judge the completeness of encoding, limiting the precision of
predictions for new experiments. The dynamics in this framework are
instead often invoked retroactively, to explain unexpected findings. For
example, Johnson et al. (2009) studied rule learning in 8- and 11-month
old infants, finding novelty preferences in 8-month olds in one
condition and familiarity preferences in 11-month olds in three others
(as well as four conditions with no significant differences). They
interpreted these differences post hoc as indicating some combination of
greater complexity for certain rules over others and faster encoding by
older children.

To move from post hoc interpretations towards predictive frameworks of
looking time experiments, computational models are beginning to play a
role. Across the cognitive sciences, computational models facilitate
theory-building and provoke more precise formulations of cognitive
phenomena (Guest \& Martin, 2021; Smaldino, 2020). For infant looking,
formal models of learning have successfully predicted infants'
habituation and subsequent preferences for novel stimuli. However, in
contrast to Hunter \& Ames (1988)'s framework, these formal models
generally do not predict that infants will show familiarity preferences
when given limited learning experience (Sirois \& Mareschal, 2002).

In a recent example of such a model, Cao, Raz, Saxe, \& Frank (2022)
proposed that habituation and novelty preferences could be explained by
a rational learner that takes noisy perceptual samples to maximize
information gain (RANCH). This model accurately predicted adult looking
time patterns in a self-paced habituation paradigm, reproducing both
habituation and novelty preferences. However, RANCH does not predict
familiarity preferences at any stage of encoding, because its policy to
maximize information gain would always prioritize learning about a novel
stimulus over a repeated familiar stimulus, just to varying degrees.

By contrast, other models do seem to contain either indirect or direct
predictions of familiarity preference. Kidd, Piantadosi, \& Aslin (2012)
proposed the ``Goldilocks effect'' -- infants' tendency to focus on
things that are neither too simple nor too complex - as a formal account
of infant looking. In this work, an ideal learner model tracked the
relative probability of objects appearing in specific locations in a
continuous stream of events, and infants' probability of looking away
from each successive object had a U-shaped link to the models'
surprisal. It has been suggested that infants' tendency to stay most
engaged with moderately predictable events may be a reflection of
familiarity preferences at early stages of encoding.

A more recent formal model used rational information gathering agents to
explain infant looking behaviors, and directly predicted familiarity
preferences (Karni, Mattar, Emberson, \& Daw, 2022). This model is
similar to RANCH in that its learning policy considers information gain,
but it also considers another source of value (i.e.~information
``need'': how frequently the information about each stimulus will be
used). A trade-off between information gain and information need
generates non-monotonic changes in looking time, which predict both
familiarity preferences and novelty preferences.

To evaluate and compare the predictions of these different model types,
however, it is necessary to have quantitative estimates of habituation,
novelty preferences, and familiarity preferences from behavioral data.
Under what circumstances do familiar stimuli evoke longer looking,
following limited exposure and thus potentially partial encoding?

In this paper, we aim to offer a stronger empirical foundation for
understanding how the duration of exposure influences looking
preferences. We conducted experiments with preschoolers and infants to
test the conditions under which familiarity preferences could be
elicited. For preschoolers, we adapted a self-paced looking time
paradigm that was previously used to capture habituation and novelty
preferences in adults (Cao et al., 2022). For infants, we developed a
new within-participants measurement paradigm. This set of experiments
allows us to directly investigate whether familiarity preferences arise
when learners have limited experience with stimuli. To preview, while
preschoolers and infants show both habituation and novelty preferences
in our paradigm, we found no evidence for familiarity preferences in
either preschoolers or infants.

\hypertarget{experiment-1}{%
\section{Experiment 1}\label{experiment-1}}

Hunter \& Ames (1988) posit that younger participants are more likely to
exhibit familiarity preferences after the same amount of exposure to a
stimulus due to their reduced encoding speed. There is some empirical
evidence suggesting that younger infants show familiarity preferences in
tasks in which older infants show novelty preferences (Cyr \& Shi, 2013;
Thiessen \& Saffran, 2003). This age-related change in preferences may
explain the lack of familiarity preferences observed in adults (Cao et
al., 2022; Gustafsson, Francoeur, Blanchette, \& Sirois, 2021). It is
possible that adults can process stimuli so fast that even brief
exposure is sufficient for completing stimulus encoding. While most
research on looking preferences has been with infant participants, there
are two main reasons to investigate this phenomenon with preschoolers.
First, preschoolers could help us understand the developmental
trajectories of novelty preferences and familiarity preferences. Second,
preschoolers are developing learners that are relatively easier to
measure, compared to the infant participants. By working with
preschoolers, we could acquire a relatively large dataset to measure the
phenomena of interest with reasonable precision.We therefore tested
young children in an experimental paradigm that has captured habituation
and novelty preferences in adults (Fig. 1: left panel, Cao et al.,
2022).

\hypertarget{methods}{%
\subsection{Methods}\label{methods}}

\hypertarget{participants}{%
\subsubsection{Participants}\label{participants}}

\captionsetup{belowskip=0pt,aboveskip=0pt}

\begin{CodeChunk}
\begin{figure*}[h]

{\centering \includegraphics{figs/experimental_design-1} 

}

\caption[Experimental design of preschooler and infant experiments]{Experimental design of preschooler and infant experiments. There were four main differences: 1) Preschoolers responded with button presses, infants through lookaways, 2) preschoolers saw background trials after deviants, whereas deviants always appeared at the end in the infant experiments, 3) in the experiment with preschoolers, all trials were self-paced; whereas in infants, only the last trial was self-paced and 4) preschooler and infant paradigms used different sets of animate stimuli.}\label{fig:experimental_design}
\end{figure*}
\end{CodeChunk}

66 children completed a task modified from the adult self-paced looking
time studies reported in Cao et al. (2022). Following our
pre-registration
(\href{https://aspredicted.org/blind.php?x=5WQ_YQH}{link}), 2 children
were excluded from the analysis because their performance in the
attention-check task failed to meet the inclusion criteria (answering 4
out of the 8 attention check questions correctly). We also excluded
trials with looking times that were three absolute deviations away from
the median in the log-transformed space across participants (Total trial
\emph{N} = 3564; Excluded trial \emph{N} = 83, 2.33\% of the total
trials). The final dataset included 64 children in total (3yr: N = 18;
4yr: N = 26; 5yr: N = 20). All participants were recruited in a
university-affiliated research preschool.

\hypertarget{stimuli}{%
\subsubsection{Stimuli}\label{stimuli}}

We used a subset of stimuli used in a prior adult self-paced looking
time study, a set of animated creatures from the computer game Spore
(developed by Maxis in 2008). The creatures all move in place. There
were 24 different animated creatures in total.

\hypertarget{procedure}{%
\subsubsection{Procedure}\label{procedure}}

Children were tested individually in a test room by an experimenter. The
experimenter invited the child to ``meet some monster friends'' and then
familiarized the child with the laptop computer used to present the
experiment. Before the test, each child went through a practice phase
where they practiced pressing the space bar to move on to the next
trial. The child was instructed that they can press the key and move on
to meet more monster friends whenever they want.

On each trial, the child would see a random animated creature drawn from
the stimuli set appear on the screen. The child could move on to the
next trial by pressing the space bar. Each block consisted of six
trials. Usually, the same creature was shown repeatedly (the background
stimulus), but each block could contain either zero or one deviant
trial. Deviant trials were trials that present a different creature from
the background stimulus. Deviant trials appeared on the second, the
fourth, or the sixth trial of the block. Each deviant trial contained a
different creature. Each child saw eight blocks in total.

At the offset of each block, we presented a memory task to ensure
children were appropriately attending to the task. We asked them which
of two creatures presented on the screen they had seen before.

\hypertarget{results}{%
\subsection{Results}\label{results}}

Data and analysis are available at
\url{https://tinyurl.com/PokebabyCogSci2023}. Children included in the
final dataset showed a high level of accuracy (\emph{M} = 0.97;
\emph{SD} = 0.08) in responding to the memory task question. This
suggests that the children were engaged in the experiment. We
anticipated that the preschooler children would show patterns of
habituation and novelty preferences similar to adults. We also expected
to see developmental changes in the shape of habituation trajectories,
with older children habituate faster than younger children. Our
pre-registered mixed-effect model included a three-way interaction term
between age (in months; scaled and centered), trial number, and trial
type (background or deviant) to predict log-transformed looking time
(Fig. 2). The interaction between the trial number and trial type was
significant, suggesting the paradigm has captured habituation and
novelty preferences in preschoolers (\(\beta\) = 0.14, \emph{SE} = 0.02,
\emph{t} = 6.22, \emph{p} \textless{} 0.01). However, we did not find
any significant interaction with age, nor was the main effect
significant (all \emph{p} \textgreater{} 0.1).

We also tested for familiarity preferences by comparing the looking time
at the second background trial and the second deviant trial. Under the
(Hunter \& Ames, 1988) framework, the second trial in each block is most
likely to yield a familiarity preference, since participants have had
the least amount of exposure to the background stimulus in a block. If
there was a familiarity preference, participants should look longer at a
background trial than a deviant trial. However, we did not find evidence
supporting this prediction. We ran a mixed effect model predicting
looking time at the second trial with trial type as the predictor. There
was a significant trial type effect in the opposite direction,
suggesting participants looked longer at the deviant trial than the
background trial even with as little as one trial of familiarization
time (\(\beta\) = 0.41, \emph{SE} = 0.03, \emph{t} = 12.24, \emph{p}
\textless{} 0.01).

In summary, this experiment captured habituation and novelty preferences
in preschoolers, replicating the patterns seen in a previous adult
sample (Cao et al., 2022). In addition, similar to the previous adult
results, we did not find any evidence of familiarity preferences.

One reason for not observing familiarity preferences may be that
processing in preschoolers is already too fast to induce partial
encoding in this paradigm. If so, we would need to test a younger
population. However, given that the performance of 3-year-olds in this
paradigm was noisier than their older peers (Fig. 2), the current
paradigm would likely not be suitable for testing even younger children.
In Experiment 2, we developed a new experimental paradigm to measure the
relationship between exposure duration and looking preferences in
preverbal infants.

\begin{CodeChunk}
\begin{figure}[t!]

\includegraphics{figs/unnamed-chunk-13-1} \hfill{}

\caption[Looking time of preschoolers faceted by age showing habituation and dishabituation, but not familiarity preferences]{Looking time of preschoolers faceted by age showing habituation and dishabituation, but not familiarity preferences. Y-axis is log-transformed to reflect transformation of looking time in mixed effects models.}\label{fig:unnamed-chunk-13}
\end{figure}
\end{CodeChunk}

\hypertarget{experiment-2}{%
\section{Experiment 2}\label{experiment-2}}

In the infant paradigm, infants were familiarized to six unique stimuli
for different exposure durations within a single session in a blocked
design, followed by a test trial which either showed the same stimulus
again or a new stimulus (Fig. 1, right panel). We chose this design as a
contrast to the standard infant familiarization/habituation paradigm in
which infants are familiarized to only one stimulus throughout an
experiment. In such designs, the effects of exposure duration must be
estimated between groups of infants. In contrast, in our design, by
presenting individual infants with multiple blocks and varying exposure
durations, we directly measured the effect of prior exposure on looking
time, within participants.

To get a dense sample of possible exposure durations, we pre-registered
and ran two experiments, sequentially, with two sets of exposure
durations. The first experiment showed infants blocks containing 0, 4 or
8 exposure events (Exp A; pre-registered at
\href{https://osf.io/gux4f/?view_only=b4d6d0118dfa41a79fb431d389f4fecc}{this
link}). The second experiment showed infants blocks containing 1, 3 or 9
exposure events (Exp B; pre-registered at
\href{https://osf.io/w6pgu/?view_only=39ee108159884761a0c5bc68d11918df}{this
link}). If the predictions by Hunter \& Ames (1988) hold in this
paradigm, we expect infants to show familiarity preferences when
provided with limited exposure (e.g.~1 to 4 familiarizations), whereas
they should show novelty preferences when familiarized for longer
(e.g.~8 or 9 familiarizations).

\hypertarget{methods-1}{%
\subsection{Methods}\label{methods-1}}

\hypertarget{participants-1}{%
\subsubsection{Participants}\label{participants-1}}

We tested a combined sample of 66 7-10 month old infants, with 31 in Exp
A and 35 in Exp B (\(M_{age}\) = 9.52 months, 31 female). 6 participants
were excluded completely due to fussiness. An additional 53 individual
test events (out of 360, 15\% of trials) did not make it into the final
analysis because 1) infants fussed out of the experiment at an earlier
stage of the experiment, 2) infants looked at the stimuli for less than
a total 2 seconds, 3) there were momentary external distractions in the
home of the infant or 4) the gaze classifier (see \textbf{Looking time
coding}) had an average classification confidence of less than 50\%.
Data collection was performed synchronously on Zoom, and infants were
recruited from Lookit (Scott \& Schulz, 2017) and Facebook.

\hypertarget{stimuli-1}{%
\subsubsection{Stimuli}\label{stimuli-1}}

Infants saw a different stimulus set from the preschoolers. In two
initial studies, not included here (but see
\href{https://osf.io/b3xsk/?view_only=5beeb6ed27874ae3bfe586ee2b38381a}{OSF
repository}), we showed infants the Spore stimulus set used in
preschoolers, in a slightly different experimental paradigm, and failed
to elicit replicable habituation, novelty or familiarity preferences. In
the current studies, we presented infants with a series of animated
animals, created using ``Quirky Animals'' assets from Unity (Fig. 1,
\href{https://tinyurl.com/469xxrn7}{link to assets}). The animals were
walking, crawling or swimming, depending on the species.

\hypertarget{procedure-1}{%
\subsubsection{Procedure}\label{procedure-1}}

The experiment was conducted via Zoom. Parents were instructed to find a
quiet room with minimal distractions, place their child in a high chair
(preferred) or on their lap, and to remain neutral throughout the
experiment. Infants were placed as close as possible to the screen
without allowing them to interact with the keyboard.

This experiment followed a block structure, where each block was divided
into two sections: 1) a familiarization period and 2) a test event. Each
block was preceded by an ``attention getter'', a salient rotating star.
During the familiarization period, the infant was familiarized to a
particular animal, the background, in a series of familiarization
trials. Each familiarization trial was a 5 second sequence: curtains
open for 1 second, the animated animal moves in place for 3 seconds, and
then the curtains close for 1 second. The number of familiarization
trials (the ``exposure duration'') varied between blocks.

During the test event, the infant saw either the same background animal
again, or a novel animal, the deviant. The onset of the test event was
not marked by any visual markers, but a bell sound played as the
curtains opened, to maximize the chance of engagement during the test
event. The test event used an infant-controlled procedure: the
experimenter terminated the trial when the infant looked away for more
than three consecutive seconds. Looking time was then defined as the
total time that the infant spent looking at the screen from the onset of
the stimulus until the first two consecutive seconds of the infant
looking away from the screen. If the infant did not look away after 60
seconds of being presented with the test event, the next block
automatically began and infants' looking time for that test event was
recorded as 60 seconds.

Each infant saw six blocks: Three different exposure durations (0, 4 and
8 in Exp. A, and 1, 3 and 9 in Exp. B) appeared twice each, once for
each test event type (background or deviant). The longer exposure
durations (8 or 9) were chosen based on our previous pilot studies with
a different stimulus set
(\href{https://osf.io/b3xsk/?view_only=5beeb6ed27874ae3bfe586ee2b38381a}{OSF
repository}), and the shorter durations were chosen to provide limited
learning experience with the background. The order of blocks was
counterbalanced between infants, and pairs of animals (background and
deviant) were counterbalanced to be associated with each block type.
Which animal was shown as the background and which as the deviant (if it
was a deviant test trial) was randomized in each block.

\hypertarget{looking-time-coding}{%
\subsubsection{Looking time coding}\label{looking-time-coding}}

To code the infants' looking time we used iCatcher+, a validated tool
developed for robust and automatic annotation of infants' gaze direction
from video (Erel et al., in press). To obtain trial-wise looking time,
we merged iCatcher+ annotations with trial timing information, thereby
fully replacing manual coding of looking time.

\hypertarget{results-1}{%
\subsection{Results}\label{results-1}}

Data and analysis are available at
\url{https://tinyurl.com/PokebabyCogSci2023}. We pre-registered several
linear mixed-effects models to test for habituation, novelty preferences
and familiarity preferences in our paradigm. All models included a fixed
effect of block number, and a random effect of subject. We did not
include a random effect of stimulus since we found that the variance of
this random effect was small relative to the subject effects and fitting
our mixed-effects models with random effects of stimulus caused
convergence issues.

To test the prediction that partial encoding elicits familiarity
preferences, while complete encoding elicits novelty preferences, we
pre-registered a model which allows for a non-linear interaction between
exposure duration by adding a quadratic effect of exposure duration, and
its interaction with novelty. We found that neither the main effect, nor
the interaction of that quadratic term were significant, while the
interaction of novelty with the linear term was significant (Table 1).
This result suggests that looking at the deviant increased as a function
familiarization duration (Fig. 3), but that there was no special effect
of partial encoding as posited by Hunter \& Ames (1988). Furthermore,
there was a significant decrease in looking time to the familiar items
as a function of familiarization duration, indicating that infants
habituated to familiar stimuli in our paradigm (\(\beta\) = -5.01;
\emph{SE} = 0.95; \emph{t} = -5.25; \emph{p} = 0). Novelty preferences
(i.e.~longer looking at the deviant than the background) were marginally
significant after 8 (\(\beta\) = 0.79; \emph{SE} = 0.22; \emph{t} =
3.58; \emph{p} = 0) and robust after 9 exposures (\(\beta\) = 0.74;
\emph{SE} = 0.15; \emph{t} = 4.85; \emph{p} \textless{} 0.01), as well
as in the combined dataset (\(\beta\) = 0.77; \emph{SE} = 0.15; \emph{t}
= 5.08; \emph{p} \textless{} 0.01).

We next tested specifically for familiarity preferences in our dataset.
Similar to the preschooler experiment, we hypothesized that familiarity
preferences are most likely to emerge in test events following short
exposure durations. To do so, we ran mixed-effects models which fit
looking time at test events following short exposures specifically, with
novelty as a predictor. However, we did not find a significant effect of
novelty on looking time after 1 (\(\beta\) = -0.04; \emph{SE} = 0.19;
\emph{t} = -0.21; \emph{p} = 0.84), 3 (\(\beta\) = 0.36; \emph{SE} =
0.19; \emph{t} = 1.85; \emph{p} = 0.08) or 4 exposures (\(\beta\) =
-0.15; \emph{SE} = 0.2; \emph{t} = -0.76; \emph{p} = 0.46). Even when
maximizing power by combining test events following all three short
exposure durations, there was no evidence of familiarity preferences
(\(\beta\) = 0.08; \emph{SE} = 0.12; \emph{t} = 0.65; \emph{p} = 0.52).

Lastly, to address whether the youngest infants in our sample may show
familiarity preferences, we ran an exploratory analysis asking whether
age interacted with the effect of novelty in the individual or combined
short exposure blocks. We found no evidence of age playing a role (all
p's \textgreater{} 0.4).

\captionsetup{belowskip=45pt,aboveskip=4pt}

\begin{CodeChunk}
\begin{figure}[h]

\includegraphics{figs/infant_results-1} \hfill{}

\caption[Looking time to background and deviant test events as a function of exposure duration]{Looking time to background and deviant test events as a function of exposure duration. We found evidence of habituation and novelty prefences, but not familiarity preferences. Y-axis is log-transformed to reflect the transformation of looking time in mixed effects models. The gray point at exposure duration 0 and the corresponding dashed reference line show baseline looking time without prior exposure.}\label{fig:infant_results}
\end{figure}
\end{CodeChunk}

\captionsetup{belowskip=5pt,aboveskip=5pt}

\begin{table*}[t]
\centering
\begin{tabular}{lrrrrrr}
  \hline
 Predictor & Coefficient & Std error & t & df & p value \\ 
  \hline
(Intercept) & 2.79 & 0.11 & 25.13 & 179.98 & \textless{ 0.001} \\ 
  \textbf{Exposure duration} & -2.94 & 0.90 & -3.253 & 246.14 & 0.001 \\ 
  \textbf{Squared exposure duration} & 0.70 & 0.90 & 0.78 & 244.54 & 0.438 \\ 
  \textbf{Novelty} & 0.19 & 0.09 & 2.16 & 245.72 & 0.031 \\ 
  \textbf{Block number} & -0.11 & 0.02 & -4.54 & 248.53 & \textless{ 0.001} \\ 
  \textbf{Exposure duration} : \textbf{Novelty} & 4.93 & 1.59 & 3.10 & 250.18 & 0.002 \\ 
  \textbf{Squared exposure duration} : \textbf{Novelty} & 0.23 & 1.63 & 0.14 & 250.91 & 0.889 \\ 
   \hline
\end{tabular}
\caption{Mixed effects model results testing for a non-linearity in infant looking time.}\label{wrap-tab:1}
\end{table*}

\hypertarget{discussion}{%
\section{Discussion}\label{discussion}}

We developed new looking time paradigms for preschoolers and infants
that tested the relationship between exposure duration and the duration
of attention within individual participants. Using these paradigms, we
found evidence for habituation and novelty preferences across all ages
tested. In contrast, despite prematurely interrupting familiarization to
induce partial encoding, we failed to find attentional preferences for
familiar stimuli in either preschoolers or infants. Limited exposure in
the current paradigms did not lead to familiarity preferences. Our
failure to find familiarity preferences, in a within-subjects design
targeting partial encoding, should suggest caution when inferring
familiarity preferences post-hoc in similar experiments.

The presence of habituation and novelty preferences along with the
absence of familiarity preferences were consistent across age groups
(and similar to previous results in adults), suggesting developmental
continuity of the dynamics of attention in this paradigm. For simple
visual events presented sequentially, the decision of how long to look
at a stimulus, and when to look away, can therefore be explained by a
simple information gain model, like the one presented in Cao et al.
(2022), across the lifespan.

The absence of familiarity preferences in our results does not rule out
their existence, in our paradigm or in general. First, familiarity
preferences may be more subtle than novelty preferences, so that the
statistical power that is needed to find familiarity preferences is
higher than that achieved in the current study. A current large-scale
study by the ManyBabies consortium which aims to test the predictions
made by Hunter \& Ames (1988) may give insight into this possibility
(Kosie et al., 2023).

Second, evoking familiarity preferences may depend on the presentation
mode of stimuli: In our studies participants saw one stimulus, familiar
or novel, at a time. By contrast, many studies reporting familiarity
preferences follow a preferential looking set-up in which infants are
presented with both familiar and novel stimuli simultaneously, and their
relative looking time to each is recorded (Roder, Bushnell, \&
Sasseville, 2000; Rose et al., 1982; Thiessen \& Saffran, 2003).
Familiarity preferences could arise due to the \emph{recognition} of a
familiar stimulus among other stimuli, in which case the current
paradigm would not be suited to detect them (though see Gustafsson et
al., 2021).

Third, affective processes might drive familiarity preferences. The
``mere exposure effect'' is widely documented in social psychology:
brief exposure to a particular stimulus can be sufficient to induce
positive affect associated with that stimulus (Montoya, Horton, Vevea,
Citkowicz, \& Lauber, 2017; Zajonc, 1968). Therefore, it is possible
that familiarity preferences arise in infants when the familiar stimulus
evokes positive affect. Including measurements that more directly tap
into liking, such as reaching or pointing (Powell, 2022; Woo, Tan, \&
Hamlin, 2022), and relating them to looking time, may help identify the
contribution of affect in familiarity preferences.

Finally, and most importantly, the learning problem that people are
solving likely plays a critical role in whether they will exhibit
familiarity preferences. This context-dependence is reflected in
meta-analyses investigating familiarity preferences in different
paradigms. For example, when tested on word segmentation in their native
language, infants show persistent preferences for familiar stimuli
throughout the first year (Bergmann \& Cristia, 2016). In contrast, when
tested on statistical learning of novel words, infants show consistent
preferences for novel stimuli, from 4-month- to 11 months of age (Black
\& Bergmann, 2017).

These seemingly contradictory results highlight the need for theories
that formalize accounts of how the learning problem influences optimal
attention. Dubey \& Griffiths (2020) give an example of such a formal
account by showing that when past and present events are correlated,
rational agents, under some assumptions, develop a tendency to attend to
familiar stimuli to prepare for the most likely future events, while in
uncorrelated environments, novelty preferences are optimal. Similarly,
in a rational analysis of attentional preferences, Cao et al. (2022)
show that ideal learners attempting to maximize their expected
information gain consistently seek novelty when trying to learn a single
concept. But it is possible that once the learning goal or constraints
on learning change e.g.~by attempting to learn hierarchical concepts or
imposing switch costs on learning new concepts, optimal
information-seeking may include a phase of attending to familiar
stimuli.

\hypertarget{conclusion}{%
\subsection{Conclusion}\label{conclusion}}

In conclusion, we found robust evidence for habituation and novelty
preferences in preschoolers and infants. In the same paradigms, we found
no evidence for familiarity preferences, despite attempting to impose
partial encoding through a new experimental paradigm in which we
manipulate exposure duration within-subjects. Our findings suggest that
familiarity preferences do not necessarily arise after limited exposure
to stimuli, so post-hoc inferences of familiarity preferences in infant
looking time data should be made with care. We conclude that
developmental psychology needs formal models to make specific
predictions for the conditions under which infants will, and will not,
show familiarity preferences, that can then be rigorously tested in
experiments.

\hypertarget{references}{%
\section{References}\label{references}}

\setlength{\parindent}{-0.1in} 
\setlength{\leftskip}{0.125in}

\noindent

\hypertarget{refs}{}
\begin{CSLReferences}{1}{0}
\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-aslin2007s}{}}%
Aslin, R. N. (2007). What's in a look? \emph{Developmental Science},
\emph{10}(1), 48--53.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-baillargeon1985object}{}}%
Baillargeon, R., Spelke, E. S., \& Wasserman, S. (1985). Object
permanence in five-month-old infants. \emph{Cognition}, \emph{20}(3),
191--208.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-bergmann2016development}{}}%
Bergmann, C., \& Cristia, A. (2016). Development of infants'
segmentation of words from native speech: A meta-analytic approach.
\emph{Developmental Science}, \emph{19}(6), 901--917.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-black2017quantifying}{}}%
Black, A., \& Bergmann, C. (2017). Quantifying infants' statistical word
segmentation: A meta-analysis. In \emph{39th annual meeting of the
cognitive science society} (pp. 124--129). Cognitive Science Society.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-cao2022habituation}{}}%
Cao, A., Raz, G., Saxe, R., \& Frank, M. C. (2022). Habituation reflects
optimal exploration over noisy perceptual samples. \emph{Topics in
Cognitive Science}.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-cyr2013development}{}}%
Cyr, M., \& Shi, R. (2013). Development of abstract grammatical
categorization in infants. \emph{Child Development}, \emph{84}(2),
617--629.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-dubey2020reconciling}{}}%
Dubey, R., \& Griffiths, T. L. (2020). Reconciling novelty and
complexity through a rational analysis of curiosity. \emph{Psychological
Review}, \emph{127}(3), 455.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-dweck2017needs}{}}%
Dweck, C. S. (2017). From needs to goals and representations:
Foundations for a unified theory of motivation, personality, and
development. \emph{Psychological Review}, \emph{124}(6), 689.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-erel2022icatcher}{}}%
Erel, Y., Shannon, K. A., Scott, K., Cao, P., Tan, X., Hart, P. K.,
\ldots{} Liu, S. (in press). iCatcher+: Robust and automated annotation
of infant gaze from videos collected in the lab and online.
\emph{Advances in Methods and Practices in Psychological Sciences}.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-fantz1963pattern}{}}%
Fantz, R. L. (1963). Pattern vision in newborn infants. \emph{Science},
\emph{140}(3564), 296--297.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-guest2021computational}{}}%
Guest, O., \& Martin, A. E. (2021). How computational modeling can force
theory building in psychological science. \emph{Perspectives on
Psychological Science}, \emph{16}(4), 789--802.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-gustafsson2021visual}{}}%
Gustafsson, E., Francoeur, C., Blanchette, I., \& Sirois, S. (2021).
Visual exploration in adults: Habituation, mere exposure, or optimal
level of arousal? \emph{Learning \& Behavior}, 1--9.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-haith1980rules}{}}%
Haith, M. M. (1980). \emph{Rules that babies look by: The organization
of newborn visual activity}. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-hunter1988multifactor}{}}%
Hunter, M. A., \& Ames, E. W. (1988). A multifactor model of infant
preferences for novel and familiar stimuli. \emph{Advances in Infancy
Research}.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-hunter1983effects}{}}%
Hunter, M. A., Ames, E. W., \& Koopman, R. (1983). Effects of stimulus
complexity and familiarization time on infant preferences for novel and
familiar stimuli. \emph{Developmental Psychology}, \emph{19}(3), 338.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-johnson2009abstract}{}}%
Johnson, S. P., Fernandes, K. J., Frank, M. C., Kirkham, N., Marcus, G.,
Rabagliati, H., \& Slemmer, J. A. (2009). Abstract rule learning for
visual sequences in 8-and 11-month-olds. \emph{Infancy}, \emph{14}(1),
2--18.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-karni2022}{}}%
Karni, G., Mattar, M. G., Emberson, L., \& Daw, N. (2022). \emph{A
rational information gathering account of infant exploratory behavior.
{[}Poster presentation{]}. RLDM}.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-kidd2012goldilocks}{}}%
Kidd, C., Piantadosi, S. T., \& Aslin, R. N. (2012). The goldilocks
effect: Human infants allocate attention to visual sequences that are
neither too simple nor too complex. \emph{PloS One}, \emph{7}(5),
e36399.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-kosie2023manybabies}{}}%
Kosie, J., Zettersten, M., Abu-Zhaya, R., Amso, D., Babineau, M.,
Baumgartne, H., \ldots{} Berteletti, I. et al. (2023). ManyBabies 5: A
large-scale investigation of the proposed shift from familiarity
preference to novelty preference in infant looking time.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-montoya2017re}{}}%
Montoya, R. M., Horton, R. S., Vevea, J. L., Citkowicz, M., \& Lauber,
E. A. (2017). A re-examination of the mere exposure effect: The
influence of repeated exposure on recognition, familiarity, and liking.
\emph{Psychological Bulletin}, \emph{143}(5), 459.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-powell2022adopted}{}}%
Powell, L. J. (2022). Adopted utility calculus: Origins of a concept of
social affiliation. \emph{Perspectives on Psychological Science},
\emph{17}(5), 1215--1233.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-raz2020learning}{}}%
Raz, G., \& Saxe, R. (2020). Learning in infancy is active, endogenously
motivated, and depends on the prefrontal cortices. \emph{Annual Review
of Developmental Psychology}, \emph{2}, 247--268.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-roder2000infants}{}}%
Roder, B. J., Bushnell, E. W., \& Sasseville, A. M. (2000). Infants'
preferences for familiarity and novelty during the course of visual
processing. \emph{Infancy}, \emph{1}(4), 491--507.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-rose1982familiarity}{}}%
Rose, S. A., Gottfried, A. W., Melloy-Carminar, P., \& Bridger, W. H.
(1982). Familiarity and novelty preferences in infant recognition
memory: Implications for information processing. \emph{Developmental
Psychology}, \emph{18}(5), 704.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-scott2017lookit}{}}%
Scott, K., \& Schulz, L. (2017). Lookit (part 1): A new online platform
for developmental research. \emph{Open Mind}, \emph{1}(1), 4--14.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-sirois2002models}{}}%
Sirois, S., \& Mareschal, D. (2002). Models of habituation in infancy.
\emph{Trends in Cognitive Sciences}, \emph{6}(7), 293--298.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-smaldino2020translate}{}}%
Smaldino, P. E. (2020). How to translate a verbal theory into a formal
model. \emph{Social Psychology}.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-thiessen2003cues}{}}%
Thiessen, E. D., \& Saffran, J. R. (2003). When cues collide: Use of
stress and statistical cues to word boundaries by 7-to 9-month-old
infants. \emph{Developmental Psychology}, \emph{39}(4), 706.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-woo2022human}{}}%
Woo, B. M., Tan, E., \& Hamlin, J. K. (2022). Human morality is based on
an early-emerging moral core. \emph{Annual Review of Developmental
Psychology}, \emph{4}, 41--61.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-zajonc1968attitudinal}{}}%
Zajonc, R. B. (1968). Attitudinal effects of mere exposure.
\emph{Journal of Personality and Social Psychology}, \emph{9}(2p2), 1.

\end{CSLReferences}

\bibliographystyle{apacite}


\end{document}
